Think of any actor by name. Chances are
you'll think of someone like this. Maybe
Robert Downey Jr., Jake Gyllenhaal, or
Mark Ruffalo. Most of the attention
given to actors goes towards these A or
Bless celebrities giving major lead or
supporting performances. As with
Gyllenhaal's obsessive sleuth, Robert
Greymith in Zodiac. But as these leads
move through the story, they inevitably
bump into a bunch of other characters
like this guy. Who is that guy? That's
the tr I think he was in Fight Club,
maybe also Devs. That guy is Zach
Grineer, who I remember most for his
small role as Andy in Deadwood, but who
has spent a lot of his career popping up
in supporting roles like this one in
Zodiac. While the leads might get the
majority of the screen time in a film,
in many movies, they are the minority of
the cast. A lot of movies are populated
with an entire ensemble of small roles
that fill in the texture of the world
around the leads. These are often
lawyers, other officials,
administrators, friends, or siblings to
the leads. They might be villains,
cronies, assistants, or dates. Sometimes
these characters don't even have a name,
but sometimes they're a key part of the
film. I go get him for you. Here's a
moment from Zodiac. Mark Ruffalo is
playing a detective who's been searching
relentlessly for the Zodiac Killer. In
this scene, he's going to finally meet a
potential suspect. Now, the role of this
suspect in the screenplay is a small
one. This character will only be on
screen for a few minutes total. Yet,
he's vital to the narrative. As the
audience, like the detectives, were
waiting to see the Zodiac Killer, so
we'll be scrutinizing his face and
mannerisms to try to figure out if he's
guilty. This performance has to carry a
lot and it's played flawlessly by John
Carol Lynch.
I told him that I'd gone to Salt Point
that weekend to skin dive, that I was
alone, but I met a couple there.
I have their names at home if you want
them. Who easily portrays the dramatic
ambiguity and menace needed for this
role. I had knives in my car that
weekend. Maybe Bill saw them and called
the other officer on me. Making his
scenes some of the most memorable in the
film. John Carol Lynch and Zach Reneer
are both examples of what we might call
character actors. These are the
performers who don't typically land lead
roles but who have still built a career
playing minor supporting characters. And
John Carol Lynch is one of the best to
ever do it. Love you. Love you.
He's also well known for his early role
as Norm Gunderson in Fargo, where again
he leaves an outsized mark on the film
with a brief performance. What are
those? Nightcrawlers. Yeah. Thanks, Huh.
This time he plays almost the opposite
of his role in Zodiac as the demure and
grounded husband to Francis McDorman's
Marge. Here again, the role and this
performance are integral to the movie.
The character's almost innocence is a
vital counterbalance to the senseless
brutality we're seeing in the rest of
the film. And Fargo wouldn't be the same
movie or mean the same thing as a movie
if it weren't for the energy of that
performance. Those are examples of when
the role is a pivotal part of the film.
But often character actors aren't
performing in roles that are
missionritical to the movie. And yet
some of the best character actors
quickly build reputations for themselves
by doing excellent acting even within
these limitations. Like for example,
David Dust Mousian. His first credited
role left a huge impression on me. You
don't think I will?
No. No, I wouldn't. When I launched The
Dark Knight as a teenager, the image of
his terrified face was one of the
strongest images in the film for me,
lingering permanently in my mind. And
since that brief appearance, he's shown
up in 92 roles in less than 20 years.
His memorable face makes him one of the
most recognizable That Guy actors of our
time. But I don't think it's fair to
reduce his success or the success of
most character actors simply to having a
memorable face. This moment wouldn't
have been so striking to me if he
weren't also a talented actor. Capturing
this kind of terror in a performance
takes skill and when an actor delivers
on this level for such a small role, it
can bring a lot to a film. Character
acting or who is a character actor can
be kind of difficult to define.
Sometimes character actor is used to
refer to people who play particularly
distinctive or unusual minor supporting
roles. Maybe someone like Catherine
Hunter, who you probably know as this
guy's mother in Andor. Uncle Harlo will
know what's best. But who has recently
also played striking characters in Poor
Things and The Tragedy of McBTH. Look
what I have. Show me. She crafts these
incredible one-of-a-kind characters that
feel entirely unique to her. There are
other actors who could play these roles,
but their characters would inevitably
feel like something else entirely. But I
think this is just an example of
particularly good or unique character
acting. I think the term character actor
still makes sense when applied more
broadly to performers who simply
specialize in minor roles. These are the
roles that are somewhere between a
speaking extra and the kind of part that
would get a best supporting actor or
actress nomination. Character actors are
the folks who have spent most of their
career working inside this gap. So
that's how I'll be using the term in
this video. The line then between who is
a character actor and who is a lead can
also be blurry. For example, when I
think of character actors, Tilda Swinton
and William Defoe immediately come to
mind because they've done a lot of great
character acting throughout their
careers. But they've both done enough
lead work at this point that I don't
think of them primarily as character
actors, even though they continue to do
excellent character acting. But what
about someone like Ann Dowed? She often
pops up as a character actor in film,
but she's consistently had larger roles
in TV. Exactly where the line falls
isn't clear, and that's fine. I'm not
interested here in figuring out what the
label character acting should be applied
to. What I'm interested in is bringing
some attention to the value and quality
of the work that usually gets this
label. I think these performers are
worth bringing some attention to because
character acting is a valuable art on
its own. Sometimes these performances
are integral to the film. And the actors
that fill these roles, even though they
often aren't considered A-listers and
don't usually show up during awards
season, are some of the most talented
people working in the industry. I'm not
exaggerating when I say I think John
Carol Lynch gives the same quality of
performance as someone like Robert
Downey Jr., Jake Gyllenhaal, or Mark
Ruffalo. He's just not the type that
usually gets cast as a lead. The best
character actors bring the same depth,
intensity, and expressiveness that we
expect from a lead role to even the most
minor parts. And they're usually working
under much tighter constraints. So, I'm
going to take you through why I think
character acting is a valuable part of
cinema by showing you some of my
favorite character actors. And there's
no way I'm going to be able to name them
all. So, I encourage you to shout out
your favorites in the comments. When I
think back to Call Me By Your Name,
usually the first thing that comes to
mind is actually the heartfelt presence
of Michael Stalberg as Mr. Pearlman.
Throughout the film, he's mostly at the
periphery of the main story line, but
the weight of his performance in a few
key scenes feels like it anchors the
film's emotional core. But to make
yourself feel nothing
so as not to feel anything,
what a waste. It would be a lesser film
without it. Stalberg has occasionally
had a bigger role like his lead
performance in A Serious Man, but for
most of his career, he's been a
consumate character actor playing roles
like this doctor in Blue Jasmine. Are
you feeling more comfortable in the job?
Or a doctor in Doctor Strange or a
doctor in The Shape of Water. He's
consistently incredible in these small
roles and sometimes he brings absolute
magic like he does with his performance
as Andy Herzfelt in Steve Jobs in 40
minutes. I can't. Who's the person who
can? I'm the person who can and I can't.
Or again in another Luca Guadanino film,
Bones and All. We're not here to run you
out. We thought you might be in need of
some beer. where Stolberg makes another
strong impression with a brief
performance. This time delivering not
one of the most heartfelt scenes in the
film, but one of the most sinister.
So he says,
"Going back to it,
I got to get a better look at this."
Michael Stolberg has more range than a
lot of people who have won Academy
Awards. and a great character actor like
him can emerge on screen feeling as
fully formed as any of the leading
roles. Sometimes it's even like they're
leading their own film, one which has
just briefly intersected with the movie
we're watching now. But even when
character actors don't steal the scene,
they still play an important part of
making the world of the film feel real.
The hard part of talking about this is
really just knowing where to start.
There are so many established legendary
character actors like Jeffrey Jones,
Allison Janie, Richard Kind, and Melanie
Linsky. People who consistently deliver
great work wherever they show up. There
are folks like Brad Durrof, who left a
distinct impression on me as Worm Tongue
in Lord of the Rings, but who is also
recognized as one of the best in a great
ensemble in One Flew Over the Cuckoo's
Nest. What impresses me about Durf's
work specifically is the intensity of
the presence of his eyes and the acting
he does with them. It's rare to find
somebody with a screen presence that
feels so intensely piercing. And the
range in his performances shows us that
it's not just the look that he has. He's
using these eyes to create these
characters. There are some newer upand
cominging character actors whose work I
really enjoy like Caleb Landry Jones.
You probably know him as the creepy
brother and get out. It's all about
this.
It's a strategic game. But he's also
done great work in the Florida Project,
Twin Peaks, The Return, and The Dead
Don't Die. Hung Chow is also someone who
has started popping up more. I first
remember seeing her in Showing Up. Been
hoping to find a good tire for this tree
for ages. But she's made recent
appearances in minor roles elsewhere.
Another great example of a great
character acting performance is Martha
Kelly in Marriage Story. She performs
such a powerful almost anti-carisma that
it's hilarious and awkward and somehow
feels outrageous even though it feels
like she's doing barely anything in the
performance.
What's the day like for the two of you
here? I asked my patrons who their
favorite character actors were and we
came up with too many to list here but
some of the most mentioned were Richard
Jenkins, Michael Shannon, Fiona Shaw,
John Paleo, Merritt Weaver, Steven Root,
Roger Gwenv Smith, and Isaiah Whitlock
Jr. We're barely dipping into film
history here. There's a whole slew of
classic character actors who left a
massive mark on film history. Arguably
one of the biggest movies of last year,
Wicked, wouldn't exist if it weren't for
the impact left by character actor
Margaret Hamilton, who played the Wicked
Witch. And there are a lot of great
actors who are now A-listers or
recognizable for their lead work, who
started out as character actors. JK
Simmons, Steve Bushi, John Malkovich,
and Brian Cox are some good examples of
this. John Tutoro is one of my favorites
in this category. He's recently got a
lot of recognition for his TV work in
shows like The Night of and Severance,
but in my opinion, some of his best work
is his early character acting. I could
talk about his iconic role as the Jesus
in The Big Labowski, but just as often,
I think about his role as Bernie
Burnbomb in Miller's Crossing, where he
played a character who always felt like
he was about to literally slink out of
the room. Okay, the point is, I'm a good
guy. Jeffrey Wright has been an
incredible character actor for decades.
But it seems like, and I hope with
American fiction, he's finally made a
break into leading man status. But
probably the greatest example of
character actor turned lead in my mind
is Philip Seymour Hoffman. He's now
remembered mostly for his
career-defining roles in The Master or
Capot, but for much of his early career,
he was an incredible character actor.
That wasn't good. You're dead. bringing
an incredible range and vibrancy to even
the smallest roles. As Scotty in Boogie
Knights, he brings this character at the
fringes to life with a heartbreaking
pathos. At the opposite end of the
spectrum, with Brandt in the Big
Labowski, he reveals his comedic chops.
They're not literally his children.
They're the little Labowski urban
achievers. Showing not just his range,
but his ability to craft a memorable and
hilarious persona through the
character's physicality and speech. As
Freddy and the talented Mr. Ripley, he
has a perfectly grading charisma, but he
was memorable even when he showed up in
roles like this unnamed craps gambler in
Heartache. What was truly impressive
about Hoffman's character acting was how
unique and rich each character felt. And
when a character actor is this good,
it's usually just a matter of time
before they're offered a larger part.
And it can be really fun to get to see
what a longtime character actor does
with more time on screen. That's why
last year when David Dossian landed a
lead in Late Night with the Devil, I saw
a lot of people expressing online just
how happy they were to get to finally
see him explore a larger role. I'd like
to thank everyone who helped bring this
dream to life. For this to happen, a lot
of times it just takes a director with a
little imagination crafting a lead role
that actually works with the talent of
some of these actors. A great example of
this is how longtime character actor
Jennifer Culage received almost
universal acclaim for her leading role
in The White Lotus. All it took was for
Mike White to see the potential. I love
when this happens because it shows that
the way character actors are often typ
cast and boxed into smaller roles and
the conventional limitations on who has
the right look or type for a lead role
are ultimately fairly arbitrary
boundaries created by those who are
unwilling to think a little bit outside
the box. But we can't really talk about
character acting without fully at least
acknowledging the dynamic at play here
and how it influences who gets to be a
lead in Hollywood. Call it a unique
look. Call it unconventional versus
conventionally attractive. However we
talk about it, how someone looks has
often played a significant role in who
gets considered for leads and beyond
that who's launched into A-list status
or stardom. The issues with this are
many. First, who decided only attractive
people should be leads? I get it.
Attractive people are nice to look at on
screen, but there's nothing about
attractive people that makes them
inherently better actors or a better fit
for many of the stories we tell in film.
And second, the standard by which
Hollywood measures attractiveness is at
best boring and unrealistic and at worst
downright sexist and racist. Sure, there
are plenty of people who don't break out
of smaller roles because they might not
have the chops to deliver the quality we
want from a leading performance. And I'm
sure there are plenty of people who
prefer working as a character actor.
Maybe they don't want the pressure,
fame, or spotlight that often comes with
leading roles. But there are also many
truly incredibly talented actors who
have been unfairly confined to character
acting just because their look is too
unconventional for the industry. And
honestly, I think these standards are
garbage. We'd be better off without
them. And all the great movies out there
that are led by character actors simply
proves this point. On the off chance
that any of these people are watching
this, I just want to say if you're out
there and you've been putting in the
work and you know you're good and you're
thinking, "What is the deal? Why am I
not getting these lead roles?" I just
want to say, I hope you know this, but
it's not you, it's the industry. And I
want to say there are some of us out
there who see the work you're doing. We
appreciate the quality and thank you for
doing it. I know this industry can be a
meat grinder. And if you want a
breakthrough role, I hope that you get
that. But just know that even if you
don't, your work is great and it is
appreciated. I also want to say while
it's exciting to see character actors
break through to leading roles, I don't
want to devalue character acting in its
own right. It's more than just a proving
ground or a stepping stone. It is in and
of itself legitimate acting that's very
respectable and is a vital part of
bringing the movies to life. I think we
should value these actors more, not just
by giving them a shot at larger roles,
but by giving some attention to the
value they bring to movies and smaller
roles. So, let's talk about what makes
good character acting. I've never done
it myself, so I can't speak from direct
experience, but from the outside, in
addition to all the things you need to
be a good actor normally, it looks like
it takes a mix of boldness and finesse.
Character actors don't have a lot of
time to work with on screen. Their
characters don't usually receive
character development in the same way
leads do. So, whatever they need to do
to build a character and make them feel
real, unique, and fleshed out has to be
quickly legible and often done through
physical presentation. Often, if there's
room for it within the style and tone of
a film, bolder choices can really pay
off. While some character actors are
good wherever they show up, good
character acting isn't just the job of
the character actor. It also takes
screenwriters and directors creating
these roles in the first place. Have you
ever watched a movie that felt weirdly
small or artificial for some hard to
pinpoint reason? Sometimes this is
because a lack of minor roles. Instead
of moving through a world that feels
populated with actual people, the
characters feel strangely isolated, as
if they exist in a world of NPCs. So
creating a good character acting role
takes a writer and a director who
creates space for them to exist and then
beyond that know how to use these minor
characters to their fullest potential.
And finally, it takes good casting and a
character actor to bring that role to
life in a memorable way. Instead of
treating these roles as stock characters
to fill with typ casting, good character
acting takes a team of people who treat
a minor role as a creative opportunity
that can be part of the artistry of the
film and help tell the story. Some
directors who really excel at this are
people like David Fincher. I used Zodiac
as an example in the opening of this
video and that movie is wallto-wall with
great character acting. Kelly Reichart
is another director who I think creates
plenty of space for great character
actors. There are many others, but maybe
nobody has done this as well as the
Cohen brothers, whose films are littered
with incredible, memorable minor
characters that are always excellently
cast and uniquely performed. I have a
whole video about why they're so good at
this that you can watch, which I'll link
to at the end. At its worst, character
acting involves actors getting typ cast
and slotted into the same stock
characters over and over. And some
character actors do some great work even
within those constraints. But at its
best, character acting is a unique art
of its own. One that makes the world of
the film feel larger than the frame,
giving us the sense that each character
that steps on screen has a rich life of
their own. And sometimes they're a
keystone without which the film would
fall apart.
I love you, Margie.
With so many major stories happening
every day, navigating the news and
staying informed can be exhausting,
especially when you take into account
that good media literacy involves not
just understanding individual stories,
but how narratives are shaped by the
news as a whole. The best tool I found
for navigating the modern media
landscape is Ground News, my sponsor for
this video. Ground News is a website and
app that doesn't just show you
individual news stories, but gives you
the tools you need to understand the
meta context surrounding each story and
how reporting shapes narratives. When I
read a story on ground news, I don't
just get the story. I get a breakdown of
where that story is coming from. Who are
the sources? What are their political
biases? What's the factuality rating?
And who owns those sources? And I can
see an overview of how each story is
being presented across the media as a
whole. One of my favorite features is
the blind spot feed. This shows you
stories that are being under
reportported by either the left or the
right. This helps you not just see what
your own blind spots are, but it also
gives you a clear portrait of how media
narratives are shaped through selective
reporting. For example, this story about
how 25 people were killed after Israeli
forces opened fire near aid trucks in
Gaza has been highly reported by both
the left and the center, but has
received barely any coverage from the
right. Staying informed to me doesn't
just mean understanding the facts of the
situation for myself, but understanding
the narratives that are being presented
across the board. This helps me
understand what other people actually
believe and why they believe the things
they do. You can use Ground News for
free, but the blind spots feed is a part
of the Vantage subscription, which you
can get for 40% off when you use my code
at ground.news/toomasflight.
So go to ground.news/toomasflight
to get 40% off that Vantage subscription
and give Ground News a try today. Ground
News is one of the best tools I have
right now for navigating the media
landscape as a whole. Thanks again to
Ground News for sponsoring this video.
[Music]